Title: The Eyes of Ara
Date: 2023-07-15
LastUpdate: 2023-07-15
Category: Games
Tags: review, games
Author: Chloe Bitshard
Progress: Draft
Confidence: 2
Summary: I’ve been trying to figure out what I like and dislike about Myst-style games.  What I like: The puzzle solving, seeing interesting environments, and seeing interesting puzzle design.  What don’t I like: Moving back and forth via tedious traversal, and pixel-hunting for various things I can click on.

This was a great first step into my search to identify the good and bad aspects of Myst-style games.  I learned a lot; some opinions were solidified, and many more questions were asked.

The puzzles were fine.  One of the things I was struck by, that I had also been noodling on recently, is that I am satisfied by fairly mid puzzles.  I prefer a good tough puzzle, or a funny puzzle, or a thoughtful puzzle.  But I also feel very satisfied solving something quite simple.  

I will be thrilled with a puzzle that is somewhat different from anything I’ve ever seen before, even if I can solve it without any trouble seconds after seeing it *so long as solving it isn’t tedious.*

There weren’t many tedious puzzles.  And their tedium generally was around misunderstandings of what was being communicated.  Puzzles where I didn’t realize a possibility was open to me.  In one scenario, I thought I unlocked a plate that I would need to place something on.   Instead, I was supposed to click and drag in a circle to rotate the plate.

Maybe that was the puzzle — identifying the intractable.  Personally, I would imagine designing the puzzle is far more entertaining than solving it.   If identification of an intractable element fails, it forces me into this obnoxious scenario where I’ve got to review every other element at my disposal.

This scenario is a force multiplier on my annoyance at the traversal, since I’ve got to double check every angle of every area I can see.

This scenario also highlights the pains of pixel hunting from each angle.  Non-obvious intractable are the bane of my existence.  The game actually y encourages this aspect explicitly, with coins scattered about the property.  

A side note on collectibles: There are other collectibles, beyond coins, which are accessed by solving non-required puzzles.  These were great, and felt like they rewarded me for careful observation.  Having collectables was also a lovely way of rewarding the player while simultaneously letting them know that there was nothing else to see here.  You’ve reached the end of this side-quest.

A side note on traversal.  I find clicking from preset point to preset point extremely unfun.  There’s something about my brain that must get a lot of joy about seeing the whole of the environment.  Jumping around I find myself confused about the mental map of floors.  When I enter a door into a square room with a door on each wall, I have no idea which door gets me back out.  However, I do understand why having static camera positions is important.  Without them, I’d drive myself insane looking for clues from all angles.  If I thought the pixel-hunt was bad before, this would make it infinitely worse.  I haven’t actually played Myst in decades,  so I think I’ll try out the 3D first person Myst version (*RealMyst, I believe?). 

Aside on Traversal: The Witness is another game that has to deal with this problem, and it does so by making the presence of discrete puzzles extremely apparent *with the exception of one optional puzzle type that I chose not to 100%.

Aside on Traversal: The Talos Principal & Portal have a similar yet different problem.  Their problems are unambiguous because each room is essentially one clear problem.  But the presence of FPS movement leads Talos principal to feel like many puzzles *might* be solved by slightly moving the avatar a few centimeters.  Portal manages to avoid this problem, likely thanks to a great deal of testing and thoughtful design which strives to make the answers always be fun or simple to execution once you’ve realized what to do (I think Portal 2 struggled with this.)

Still, I’m left unhappy with the game, as I feel like more time is spent on the un-fun aspects of gameplay.  Joyless traversal and pixel hunting.  This game doesn’t have any stop-you-in-your-tracks puzzles in the first third.  Instead most puzzles are satisfying but require little thought.  I think they were satisfying, but because they were quick, it exacerbated the problems above.